uDiscovery redesign (#242)
eclipse-uprotocol/up-spec: up-l3/udiscovery/v3/service.adoc

--

=== GetServiceTopics()

`GetServiceTopics()` is used to fetch metadata about one or more topics based on the passed `UUri`. Clients call this API to get additional information about the topic(s) such as the message format, id, permission level, etc.

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-getservicetopics-error-invalid~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--
* *MUST* return `UCode.INVALID_ARGUMENT` if the passed in URI is not a valid xref:../../../basics/uri.adoc[uProtocol URI].
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-getservicetopics-error-notfound~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--
* *MUST* return `UCode.NOT_FOUND` if no topic matching the URI was found.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-getservicetopics-error-permission~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--
* *MUST* return `UCode.PERMISSION_DENIED` if the caller is not permitted to invoke this API.
--

=== Recursive Lookups

Recursive lookups happen when the client sets the following information in the request message of the FindService() or GetServiceTopics() API:
[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-recursive-authority-wildcard~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--
*  `authority_name` *MUST* contain the wildcard `*`.
--

> If `search_central` inside of the `FindServicesRequest` or `GetServiceTopicsRequest` is `true``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `recursive` flag of a `FindServicesRequest` or `GetServiceTopicsRequest` is set to `true`:
```

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-recursive-central~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--

> * *MUST* search recursively up to and including the central instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *MUST* search recursively along the branch within the uDiscovery service instance hierarchy up to and including the root node of the tree.
```

= uDiscovery Service
:toc: preamble
:sectnums:
:source-highlighter: highlight.js
:client-proto-ref: xref:../../../up-core-api/uprotocol/core/udiscovery/v3/udiscovery.proto[udiscovery.proto]

> :replicator-proto-ref: xref:../../../up-core-api/uprotocol/core/udiscovery/v3/udiscovery.proto[udiscovery_replicator.proto]

Reviewer: you should only use `xref` for references to AsciiDoc resources. For everything else, use `link`

UDiscovery Service implements two sets of APIs:

- *Client APIs ({client-proto-ref}):* Used by uEs to find services and their topic metadata, and for recursive lookups at the domain and central levels.

- *Replication API ({replicator-proto-ref}):* Used Internally by uDiscovery services to add, update, or delete service metadata from local, domain, and/or central service instances.

<<udiscovery-design>> below provides an overview of the design and use of the Client and Replication APIs to implement the uDiscovery business logic.

.uProtocol Discovery Design
[#udiscovery-design]
image::design.drawio.svg[Overview]

=== Terms

- *Fully Qualified Service URI (FQURI):* A URI that contains all the information needed to uniquely identify a service. A fully qualified service URI contains the following information:
  - *ue_id:* The unique identifier of the service (both the instance and service ID portions).
  - *authority_name:* The name of the authority that hosts the service.
  - *ue_version_major:* The version of the service.
  - *resource_id:* The resource ID (value of 0 is used to indicate the default ID for the service).

> == Client APIs

Reviewer: I am surprised to see the client facing API being described here again. Isn't the Client facing API described in the `client.adoc` file? Isn't that the whole purpose of the split-up of the original proto service into two separate (proto) services (`UDiscovery` and `UDiscoveryReplicator`)?

--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-findservicetopics-error-notfound~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--
* *MUST* return `UCode.NOT_FOUND` if no topic matching the URI was found.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-findservicetopics-error-permission~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--
* *MUST* return `UCode.PERMISSION_DENIED` if the caller is not permitted to query for that topic(s).
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-findservicetopics-error-internal~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--
* *MUST* return `UCode.INTERNAL` if an internal error occurs (database is corrupted).
--

=== Recursive Lookups

Recursive lookups happen when the client sets the following information in the request message of the FindService() or FindServiceTopics() API. wishes to To recursively lookup up to the domain (or central) levels, the client calling the API :
[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-recursive-authority-wildcard~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--
*  `authority_name` *MUST* contain the wildcard `*`.
--

If `search_central` inside of the `FindServicesRequest` or `GetServiceTopicsRequest` is `true``:
[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-recursive-central~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--

> * *MUST* search recursively up to and including the central instance.

Reviewer: Does a UDiscover instance know whether the _next hop_ already is the central instance? Does it need to know? FMPOV it would be sufficient to require a service instance to ask _the next in chain_, if one is configured ...

Author: @sophokles73 do you want to rename the field `search_central` then to be something more like `recursive`?

--

UDiscovery services perform a recursive search when the local or domain instance calls `FindService()` or `FindServiceTopics()` API and then propagates the response back to the client.

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-recursive-async~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--

> * The original local search *MUST ONLY* return the response message when the recursive search has completed.

Reviewer: FMPOV we should also shortly comment on using the TTL value appropriately for this purpose ...

Author: FindServicesRequest does not include a ttl, there is only the uAttributes ttl for the request.

--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-recursive-internal~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--

> * The uDiscovery service *MUST* cache the results of the recursive search for the duration `ttl` that is returned in the response message.

Reviewer: I believe that the `ttl` being referred to here is the `ttl` contained _in_ the response message _itself_, not the `ttl` contained in the UMessage attributes of the response message?

Author: @sophokles73  yes, do I need to make it more explicit?

--

.Recursive Search to Central
[#recursive-search-central]
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
sequenceDiagram

Client ->> Local-UDiscovery: FindService()
Local-UDiscovery ->> Domain-UDiscovery: FindService()
Domain-UDiscovery ->> Central-UDiscovery: FindService()
Central-UDiscovery -->> Domain-UDiscovery: FindServicesResponse
Domain-UDiscovery -->> Local-UDiscovery: FindServicesResponse
Local-UDiscovery -->> Client: FindServicesResponse
----

== Replication API

=== SetServiceTopics()

> The `SetServiceTopics()` API is used by the uDiscovery business logic to add, update, or remove information recursively between the local, domain, and central instances. The API is passed `SetServiceTopicsRequest` containing a repeated list of `UServiceTopicInfo` and `ttl` for when the info will expire. The function returns `SetServiceTopicsResponse` message if the method was successfully processed or it returns `UStatus` containing the error values specified below. 

Author: I would assume it would be some central uE that is reponsible for handling software updates.

* *MAY* grant access to deployment specific uEs such as a the software manager that installs or removes uEs.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-setservicetopic-error-notfound~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--
* *MUST* return `UCode.NOT_FOUND` if no topic matching the URI was found when the `UServiceTopic` is being removed (i.e. `ttl=0`).
--

.Replication API Design
[#udiscovery-replication-design]
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
sequenceDiagram

OTAClient ->> Local-UDiscovery: SetServiceTopics()
Local-UDiscovery -->> OTAClient: SetServiceTopicsResponse

Local-UDiscovery ->> Domain-UDiscovery: SetServiceTopics()
Domain-UDiscovery -->> Local-UDiscovery: SetServiceTopicsResponse

Domain-UDiscovery ->> Central-UDiscovery: SetServiceTopics()
Central-UDiscovery -->> Domain-UDiscovery: SetServiceTopicsResponse
----

== Implementation Consideration

It is possible the information in domain or central instances might become out of sync with what is stored in the other instances. In order to rectify this situation:

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-data-reconciliation~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--

> * Domain and central instances *MUST* ensure that the information within its database is accurate and up to date and reconcile any differences periodically using the client and replication APIs described in this specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Domain and central instances *MUST* ensure that the information within their databases is accurate and up to date and reconcile any differences periodically using the client and replication APIs described in this specification.
```

--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-data-reconciliation-frequency~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--

> * *MUST* provide an implementation of data reconciliation using the above APIs where the frequency of reconciliation is customizable so the deployment can adjust the frequency based on the deployment needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Domain and central instances *MUST* provide an implementation of data reconciliation using the above APIs where the frequency of reconciliation is customizable so the deployment can adjust the frequency based on the deployment needs.
```

--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-data-reconciliation-data~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--

> * When reconciling data, the data fetched *MUST* be used in lieu of current cached data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When reconciling data, a client *MUST* replace corresponding data in its local cache with the fetched data. 
```

--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-data-reconciliation-not-found~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--

> * If `GetServiceTopics()` returns `UCode.NOT_FOUND` for data we had in our local instance, we *MUST* flush the local cache and then replicate the deletion. we fetch information to reconcile the data If the reconciliation fails, the service *MUST* log the error and continue to use the current cached data.

Reviewer: I am not sure who is `we` in these sentences. Can you rephrase this being (super-)explicit about the roles?

Author: Cleaned up the requirements.

> * If `GetServiceTopics()` returns `UCode.NOT_FOUND` for data we had in our local instance, we *MUST* flush the local cache and then replicate the deletion. we fetch information to reconcile the data If the reconciliation fails, the service *MUST* log the error and continue to use the current cached data.

Reviewer: is this the `FindServiceTopics()` operation described above in the client API section?

Author: Removed the ambiguity

--

<<udiscovery-reconciliation>> below provides an example of the domain instance reconciling with local instance and then propagating the change to the central instance. In the example the reconciliation (determining if the data is out of sync or not) happens in the `ReconcileData()` function.

.Reconciliation Example
[#udiscovery-reconciliation]
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
sequenceDiagram

participant Local-UDiscovery
participant Domain-UDiscovery
participant Central-UDiscovery

> Domain-UDiscovery ->> Local-UDiscovery: GetServiceTopics()

Reviewer: `FindServiceTopics()`?

Author: The API is actually GetServiceTopics(), sorry for the confusion. I fixed this everywhere

* The uDiscovery service *MUST* cache the results of the recursive search for the duration `ttl` that is returned in the response message.
--

.Recursive Search to Central
[#recursive-search-central]
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
sequenceDiagram

Client ->> Local-UDiscovery: FindService()
Local-UDiscovery ->> Domain-UDiscovery: FindService()
Domain-UDiscovery ->> Central-UDiscovery: FindService()
Central-UDiscovery -->> Domain-UDiscovery: FindServicesResponse
Domain-UDiscovery -->> Local-UDiscovery: FindServicesResponse
Local-UDiscovery -->> Client: FindServicesResponse
----

== Replication API

=== SetServiceTopics()
The `SetServiceTopics()` API is used by the uDiscovery business logic to add, update, or remove information recursively between the local, domain, and central instances. The API is passed `SetServiceTopicsRequest` containing a repeated list of `UServiceTopicInfo` and `ttl` for when the info will expire. The function returns `SetServiceTopicsResponse` message if the method was successfully processed or it returns `UStatus` containing the error values specified below. 

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-replication-client~1",oft-needs="impl"]
--

> * link:../languages.adoc[uProtocol Language Libraries] *MUST NOT* implement the client-side of {replicator-proto-ref} API as these APIs are only used internally by uDiscovery business logic.

Reviewer: Me neither, I therefore suggest removing the specitem definition.

> * link:../languages.adoc[uProtocol Language Libraries] *MUST NOT* implement the client-side of {replicator-proto-ref} API as these APIs are only used internally by uDiscovery business logic.

Author: ok done (when pushed)

--

To replicate removal of `UServiceTopic` metadata:
[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-setservicetopic-remove~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--
* `ttl` value in `SetServiceTopicsRequest` *MUST* be set to 0.
--

`SetServiceTopics()` Failure Reasons:

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-setservicetopic-error-invalid~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--
*MUST* return `UCode.INVALID_ARGUMENT` if the URI passed does not contain a valid ue_id or a FQURI.
--
  
[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-setservicetopic-error-permission~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--
* *MUST* return `UCode.PERMISSION_DENIED` if the caller is not uDiscovery service in the correct recursive order (i.e. local -> domain -> central).
* *MAY* grant access to deployment specific uEs such as a the software manager that installs or removes uEs.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-setservicetopic-error-notfound~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--
* *MUST* return `UCode.NOT_FOUND` if no topic matching the URI was found when the `UServiceTopic` is being removed (i.e. `ttl=0`).
--

.Replication API Design
[#udiscovery-replication-design]
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
sequenceDiagram

> OTAClient ->> Local-UDiscovery: SetServiceTopics()

Reviewer: OTAClient?

Local-UDiscovery -->> OTAClient: SetServiceTopicsResponse

Local-UDiscovery ->> Domain-UDiscovery: SetServiceTopics()
Domain-UDiscovery -->> Local-UDiscovery: SetServiceTopicsResponse

Domain-UDiscovery ->> Central-UDiscovery: SetServiceTopics()
Central-UDiscovery -->> Domain-UDiscovery: SetServiceTopicsResponse
----

== Implementation Consideration

It is possible the information in domain or central instances might become out of sync with what is stored in the other instances. In order to rectify this situation:

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~discovery-data-reconciliation~1",oft-needs="impl,test"]
--

> * Domain and central instances *MUST* ensure that the information within their databases is accurate and up to date and reconcile any differences periodically using the client and replication APIs described in this specification.

Reviewer: is the replication always only happening from _root_ to _leaf_, i.e. it is always initiated by a node asking its parent, never the other way around? This would also mean that nodes are only required to know their parent, but not the other way around, which would be good FMPOV.

Author: In an ideal world perhaps yes but due to the temporal nature of the leaves, it could be possible that the parents are not aware of changes in the leaves and they need to query the leaf (ex. the vehicle device does a factory reset of SW settings and there is no connectivity for a period of time. The replication needs to work in both directions to handle corner cases.

Reviewer: Couldn't we instead specify that child nodes **MUST** (re-)sync with their parent node whenever they start up?

Author: @sophokles73 Ok I changed this, please take a look.
